This lecture's gonna provide an overview
of the cycle of data analysis.
Data analysis is a complex process
that can involve many pieces and
many different tools.
But fundamentally,
there are only three parts to it.
The first part is setting expectations.
The second part involves
collecting information and
comparing your expectations to data, and
the last part Involves reacting to data,
and revising your expectations.
So that's basically it.
Those are the three parts of data analysis
that you often will cycle through,
many times, in the course of
analyzing any given data set.
So I'm gonna break down each one of these
pieces to give you a little bit of
a description of what they are, and I'll
give you a little example of kinda how
they might be applied in the real world.
So steady expectations involve
deliberately thinking about
what you're gonna do before you do it.
Now, the idea in any part of data analysis
is that everything you do is gonna
have some sort of consequence,
whether it's collecting data, whether
it's fitting a model, whether it's asking
a question or making some sort of plot.
Everything you do there will be some sort
of action, and the point is you wanna
think about what that consequence
is gonna be, before you do it.
And that way you set the expectations for
yourself, and
you can determine whether the reality
kind of meets that expectation.
So that's the first part
of the data analysis cycle.
Once you've set your expectations the next
thing you wanna do is collect some data or
collect some information that will
allow you to compare those expectations
to reality.
And so,
collecting that information is key,
because it will tell you whether or
not your expectations were right.
Whether they were wrong.
Whether they were too high, too low,
whatever it is depending on
the problem you're working on.
And then, once you've collected that
information, and compared it to your
expectations you can react to it, and
maybe change your behavior in some way.
So the last part of the data analysis
cycle is to think about what have
we learned from the data, from our
expectations, and their comparison.
What would we do differently next time.
Did we match our expectations,
did they not match, why or why not.
So that's the third part.
And then, once you've completed the third
part and you've revised your expectations,
you may go back, with these revised
expectations and collect more data and
try to match them again, and
then this iteration continues, often for
many different times in
any given data analysis.
So I just wanna give you a quick
example of how you can use these
three components in a kind of generic or
kind of commonplace setting.
So the basic example I'm gonna present
here is going out to dinner with
your friends.
So suppose you're going out to dinner and
the restaurant you're going
to is a cash only place.
So the question you have to ask yourself
is how much money should you bring.
And the basic activity you're gonna
engage in is eating a meal, and you're
gonna check for the bill, and you're gonna
have to pay, money to pay for the meal.
But before you do that, you gotta figure
out how much money to bring, and so
you have to figure out well, what's your
expectation for the cost of this meal.
Maybe you've dined at this
restaurant all the time, so
you know exactly how much it's gonna cost.
Maybe you know, well in this city, the
typical meal costs this many dollars, and
so I'll just bring that much money,
cuz this is an average kind of restaurant.
Maybe you know,
well the most expensive restaurant in
this city costs this many dollars.
So I know it's not gonna
cost this more than that, so
I'll just bring that to kind of serve as
an upper bound on how much money I might
end up spending at this restaurant.
You might ask your friends,
if they've been their before,
how much does this place cost.
Or you might Google the restaurant and
maybe look up the menu to see what
the meal typically costs there.
At any rate, before you've gone to the
restaurant and eat the meal, you can use
any sort of opreory information
to set up your expectations for
what the cost is ultimately gonna be.
Before you observe the real thing.
So once you've set your expectations, you
can figure out how much money to bring.
The actual collecting of the data
involves going to the restaurant and
getting the check.
So once you've gotten the check,
you observed the reality
of what the meal costs.
And there's two possibilities.
One is that,
that cost meets your expectation.
So suppose you thought
it was gonna be $30, and
it ended up being $30, then that's great.
You know exactly,
you brought the right amount of money,
and then you can pay for the meal.
The other possibility is that
the expectations don't match of what
the reality is.
So thought it was $30 and
it ended up being $40.
And so, you have to ask yourself
then why do you have that mismatch.
Why is it that you thought it was $30 and
the meal turned out to be $40.
So there's two possibilities.
One is that your expectations were wrong.
So you thought that the restaurant
was cheaper than it actually was.
Another possibility is that there's
something wrong with the data, for
example.
It's possible that they added up the check
wrong, maybe they charged you for
something for
that you didn't actually eat.
So you can look at the check to see if
there is a problem with the data that you
collected.
One thing to note about
this example is that it was
easy to know whether your expectations
were matched with the data or not.
So for example, if your expectation was
the meal would cost $30, and then it
actually cost $40, you know immediately
that your expectations were not right.
The meal was $10 more than you
actually thought it was gonna be.
And so,
you can make that conclusion very quickly.
Another possibility, for example,
is that you could've said well
the meal being between 0 and $1,000.
And so, when the data actually comes
in and you see the check is $40 then it
actually matches your expectation which
is that it's between 0 and $1,000.
But because your original
expectation was so diffused, and
so kind of general,
you don't really learn that much from
collecting the data given your
very diffused expectation.
So this brings us to an important point
which is that it's important to have
a very sharp expectation or
a sharp hypothesis about what
you're trying to investigate.
When I said that I expected
the meal to be $30,
it was very easy to know when
my expectations were not met.
But if my expectation was very diffused
and not sharp at all, like between 0 and
1,000, then, collecting the data
doesn't really help you.
Or it doesn't help you learn the process
you're trying to study or in this case,
the cost of the meal at this place.
So ultimately,
what we're leaning toward with
setting your expectations in collecting
data is called a change in behavior or
an understanding of the mechanism
you're trying to study.
What did we learn, and
what would you do differently next time?
So in this scenario where you
thought it was gonna be $30 and
it ended up being $40, well then the next
time you might bring an extra $10.
If you originally thought it
was gonna be between 0 and
$1,000 then the cost ended up being $40,
it's not clear that you would change
anything about your behaviour
based on this data.
And so, if there is no change
in what you might think or
what you might do based on
the collection of the data and
matching it with your expectations,
then that's often a sign that
either the evidence from your experiment
is not very strong or the data analysis
was not able to generate enough evidence,
or there may be some other problem.
With your study or
your data analysis process.
So setting the right expectations and
making them as sharp as possible
is a really key element to this
whole data analysis cycle.